[AUDIO LOGO]
>> So what if I told you that
your brain isn't the only organ
in your body that receives
and processes information.
What if we had
another organ waiting
to change our understanding
of how our brain works
and the future development
of neurotechnologies?
An organ that not only
affects how we think and feel,
but now is being seen
as a crucial link
in mental health,
neurodegeneration,
and even consciousness.
So I started my career as
a pharmaceutical scientist,
and I was actually
involved in studies looking
at drug deposition in the lung.
And I was mainly
involved in studies
looking at how we are impacted
by electrostatic fields.
And actually, it was
from that experience
that I came to the conclusion
that a lot of these drugs that
are being taken, especially
for things like asthma, which
was my field of study, could
be enhanced or even totally
eliminated by very simple
techniques such as grounding,
for example.
So this led me to
leave my position
in pharmaceutical company.
And actually, I
moved to California
and became more
involved in research
into alternative medicines
that embraced these effects
of charges within our body.
And I started looking
actually at structured water
technologies.
Now, structured
water forms, when
water is subjected to
an electromagnetic field
like light, that's next to a
charged surface, for example,
a cell membrane.
But because I had a
neuroscience background,
this very quickly led me
to think about the brain,
because after all, the
brain is 75% water.
So could light with its
amazing effect on water,
have an effect on the brain?
And this led me to the field of
transcranial photobiomodulation.
And I know that's a
bit of a mouthful,
so I'll just spell that out.
Transcranial meaning over the
head, photo meaning light,
modulation meaning
to change something.
So really, this is
just shining light
onto the head to have an
effect on brain function.
And actually, I very
quickly found out,
there were a lot of
people who were already
doing this kind of research.
And they were really
looking at light.
And surprisingly
enough, they were
looking at supposedly
degenerative diseases
such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's
and having a positive effect.
So this is me,
this is me in 2018.
Actually, I did
some data collection
for a trial using
near-infrared light,
and this is a dementia trial.
And it became very apparent to
me over the course of the trial
that this therapy
really does work.
I saw some radical
changes in the patients
that were on the active
arm of this trial.
But I wasn't so happy
with the delivery
devices that were being used.
I wanted something that was
a bit more usable, a bit more
applicable,
something that people
could use at home, perhaps.
And this is really what started
me on my own five-year journey
to find the best delivery
system for light therapies,
for brain health, for myself
and for people who are looking
to optimize where we're at.
So I'll briefly go back
and talk a little bit
about what is light therapy,
just as a bit of a catch-up
before I start going into how I
think really we need to change
the way that we're using
light therapy delivery
and especially in regards
to the second brain.
So photobiomodulation,
really, it's
just utilizing specific
wavelengths of light
in a targeted way to have
an impact on the body.
And when we're talking
about particularly light
for the brain, we use
red light therapy.
So we're using light
that's in the red spectrum
and in the invisible
light spectrum,
or it's called
near-infrared light.
And light is mainly
received in the body.
We are covered in
light receptors.
We are diurnal mammals.
We have evolved outside.
We are meant to
respond to light.
And one of the main
mechanisms of action
is light is received by these
small organelles in the body
called mitochondria.
And I want you to take note
of what the mitochondria look
like here.
They even look like bacteria.
And that's because they have
an evolutionary background
and ancestry that bacteria--
that mitochondria probably were
bacteria that have been taken
up by multicellular organisms.
So yes, it's maybe
no surprise when
I'm going to talk to you a
bit now about the microbiome,
that the mitochondria is
the place where we receive
and utilize transformed light.
So what is the second brain
that I'm talking about?
Well, I'm talking here
about the microbiome.
So the microbiome is a 3-pound
invisible organ that's situated
mainly in our gut.
Most of our bacteria
are in our gut.
90% of the cells in
the body are bacterial.
That may be a slight
overestimation,
but I've looked at
a lot of papers.
And it's a factor of
between 2 and about 10.
So we are at least
50% non-human cells.
So 50% of our body is not what
we would consider ourselves.
It's bacterial, it's yeast,
it's other kinds of microbes.
90% of your neurotransmitters
are made in the gut.
And the microbiome
has a profound effect
on the production of
these neurotransmitters.
The microbiome is an integral
part of the immune system.
The microbiome interacts
with our vagus nerve
and is sending messages
constantly to the brain,
telling us what to
do and influencing
our mood and our behaviors.
But perhaps you're not
quite convinced yet
that the microbiome is
having this profound effect.
So I want you to consider the
case of a microorganism called
toxoplasma gondii.
Now, this is a microbe
that infects mice.
And this causes the mice
to lose their fear of cats.
And in fact, when
mice are infected
by this bug, this
microbiome, they actually
become attracted to cats.
So this is a way that this
particular parasite is actually
hijacking the mouse's free
will to its own agenda.
Again, grasshoppers.
So grasshoppers can be affected
by a parasite called hairworm.
Now, hairworm will
invade a grasshopper
and cause the grasshopper to
find water and jump into it.
Of course, the
grasshopper-- this
is totally out of what a
grasshopper would usually do.
And the grasshopper
meets, unfortunately,
its watery demise, but it
completes the life cycle
of that parasite.
So this leads us to a
very interesting question,
how many of our own choices and
decisions are truly our own?
And how many of those are
the agendas and motivations
of our microbe and
our microbiome?
So this is why when I was
looking to develop the most
optimum neurotech.
I decided that we really do need
to have a holistic approach.
And in this case, two brains
really are better than one.
If we want to develop the
most effective neurotech,
we have to take into account
the interconnectedness
of our existence.
We have to embrace the fact that
we are not just individuals,
we are symbiotic communities of
organisms all working together.
And by embracing that
interconnectedness,
by developing technologies
that not only target the brain,
targets the site that we're
actually trying to modify,
but also takes into
account our microbiome.
We can then form
neurotechnologies
that really are
the most effective
and give us really
the best chance
of having healthy
brains, healthy guts,
and a healthy community
living within us.
Thank you.
[AUDIO LOGO]